docs: extend the security documentation to align with SEC0030 v1.3 (#893)
canonical/pebble: docs/explanation/security.md

# Security

## Product architecture

Pebble runs as a long-lived daemon that supervises a set of services on behalf of an administrator. Its trust boundaries follow from that position: clients reach the daemon over a Unix socket (with an optional limited TCP surface), the daemon manages services as configured, and persistent state lives in the `$PEBBLE` directory on disk.

```{mermaid}

> flowchart LR
>     Client["Pebble client or<br/>third-party client"]
>     HTTP["Open access to<br/>limited endpoints"]
>     Daemon["Daemon<br/>(service / exec /<br/>check / log managers)"]
>     subgraph State["$PEBBLE directory"]
>         StateDB[("State DB<br/>+ layer files<br/>+ Unix socket")]
>     end
>     HostFS["Service files, exec targets,<br/>working dirs, check files"]
>     Services["Managed services"]
>     Logs["Log targets<br/>(such as Loki)"]
> 
>     Client -- "HTTP over socket<br/>(local UID or basic auth)" --> Daemon
>     HTTP -- "HTTP over TCP<br/>(unauthenticated)" --> Daemon
>     Daemon -- "fork/exec, signals,<br/>service-log capture" --> Services
>     Daemon -- "read / write state" --> StateDB
>     Daemon -- "read / write<br/>(as configured)" --> HostFS
>     Daemon -- "forward service logs" --> Logs

Reviewer: A couple of tweaks for consistent use of lists vs /

```suggestion
flowchart LR
    Client["Pebble client or<br/>third-party client"]
    HTTP["Open access to<br/>limited endpoints"]
    Daemon["Daemon<br/>(service, exec,<br/>check, log managers)"]
    subgraph State["$PEBBLE directory"]
        StateDB[("State DB,<br/>layer files,<br/>Unix socket")]
    end
    HostFS["Service files, exec targets,<br/>working dirs, check files"]
    Services["Managed services"]
    Logs["Log targets<br/>(such as Loki)"]

    Client -- "HTTP over socket<br/>(local UID or basic auth)" --> Daemon
    HTTP -- "HTTP over TCP<br/>(unauthenticated)" --> Daemon
    Daemon -- "fork/exec, signals,<br/>service-log capture" --> Services
    Daemon -- "read/write state" --> StateDB
    Daemon -- "read/write<br/>(as configured)" --> HostFS
    Daemon -- "forward service logs" --> Logs
```

```

More detail:

> 

Reviewer: If we were introducing bullets we'd need this. But I think we can drop it here

```suggestion
```

Clients reach the daemon over a Unix socket in the `$PEBBLE` directory. The daemon authorises each request from the connecting user's UID, mapping it to a Pebble identity; the `basic` identity type uses a hashed password sent over the same socket.

When the daemon is started with `--http`, a deliberately limited set of open-access endpoints is exposed over TCP without authentication.

> The daemon runs with the privileges it was started with and launches services as configured, so a service is only as isolated from the daemon as the host makes it. Beyond `$PEBBLE`, the daemon can read or write any path that its configured services, exec commands, and checks touch — bounded by the privileges it was started with.

Reviewer: Maybe easier to read this way?

```suggestion
The daemon runs with the privileges it was started with and launches services as configured, so a service is only as isolated from the daemon as the host makes it. Beyond `$PEBBLE`, the daemon can read or write any path that is accessible by its configured services, exec commands, and checks — bounded by the privileges it was started with.
```

> The daemon's persistent state lives in the `$PEBBLE` directory — the state DB, the Unix socket, and any layer files — which defaults to `/var/lib/pebble/default`. Its confidentiality and integrity depend on the directory's permissions. Setting `PEBBLE_PERSIST=never` keeps the state in memory only, so the on-disk footprint reduces to the layer files and Unix socket. The directory can be seeded on first start from another location with `PEBBLE_COPY_ONCE`. The Pebble CLI stores its own client-side data files under `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` (`$HOME/.config` by default), separate from the daemon's `$PEBBLE` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The daemon's persistent state (the database, socket, and layer files) lives in the `$PEBBLE` directory, which defaults to `/var/lib/pebble/default`. Its confidentiality and integrity depend on the directory's permissions. Setting `PEBBLE_PERSIST=never` keeps the state in memory only, so the on-disk footprint reduces to the layer files and Unix socket. The directory can be seeded on first start from another location with `PEBBLE_COPY_ONCE`. The Pebble CLI stores its own client-side data files under `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` (`$HOME/.config` by default), separate from the daemon's `$PEBBLE` directory.
```

    Logs["Log targets<br/>(such as Loki)"]

    Admin -- "Unix socket<br/>(UID-keyed identity)" --> Daemon
    Client -- "Unix socket / --https TLS" --> Daemon
    HTTP -- "open-access endpoint set" --> Daemon
    Daemon -- "fork/exec, signals,<br/>service-log capture" --> Services
    Daemon -- "read / write state" --> StateDB
    Daemon -- "forward service logs" --> Logs
```

The first boundary is between users who interact with the daemon and the daemon itself. Clients connect over a Unix socket, and the daemon authorises each request from the connecting user's UID, mapping it to a Pebble identity. When the daemon is started with `--http`, a further trust boundary is exposed: a deliberately limited set of open-access endpoints reachable over TCP without authentication.

The second boundary is between the daemon and the services it manages. The daemon runs with the privileges it was started with and launches services as configured, so a service is only as isolated from the daemon as the host makes it.

The third boundary is between the daemon and its on-disk state in the `$PEBBLE` directory, whose confidentiality and integrity depend on directory permissions.

> This section is drawn from Pebble's SSDLC threat model. The full asset and threat catalogue (crown jewels, stepping stones, and ranked threats per C/I/A) lives with the SSDLC artefacts; this page summarises the architecture-relevant boundaries.

Reviewer: This paragraph feels heavy on jargon and not so informative. Could we drop the whole paragraph?

```suggestion
```

Author: Ah, yes, I was thinking of dropping this anyway; it's not clear to me if we are meant to mention the internal docs or not.

> ## Secure by design

Reviewer: This section has a large overlap with "Access to the API". Could we combine them?

> Pebble is designed to keep its security surface small by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pebble keeps its security surface small by default.
```

By default, Pebble stores its configuration, internal state, and Unix socket in the directory specified by the `PEBBLE` environment variable. If `$PEBBLE` is not set, Pebble uses the directory `/var/lib/pebble/default`.

The `$PEBBLE` directory must be readable and writable by the UID of the pebble process. Make sure that no other UIDs can read or write to the `$PEBBLE` directory. You can do that with `chmod`, for example:

```{terminal}
chmod 700 /var/lib/pebble/default
```

The file `$PEBBLE/.pebble.state` contains the internal state of the Pebble daemon. You shouldn't try to edit this file or change its permissions.

If `$PEBBLE_PERSIST` is set to `never`, then Pebble will only keep the state in memory without persisting it to the state file.

## Hardening

> Beyond restricting the `$PEBBLE` directory permissions described above, you can further harden a Pebble deployment:

Reviewer: Instead of this first sentence, how about "To harden a Pebble deployment:" instead. Then add a bullet something like "Restrict the $PEBBLE directory permissions" with a link to the Pebble directory section. It wouldn't necessarily need to be the first bullet if we feel that others are more critical.

> - Prefer the default Unix-socket API over the `--http` option. The open-access endpoints exposed by `--http` require no authentication, so only enable them when you genuinely need unauthenticated network access to that limited endpoint set.

Reviewer: A couple of readability suggestions. I feel the word "over" may be confusing here, because elsewhere we use language like "connect over a Unix socket".

```suggestion
- Use the default Unix-socket API rather than the `--http` option. The open-access endpoints exposed by `--http` require no authentication, so you should only enable them when you genuinely need unauthenticated network access to that limited endpoint set.
```

- Give each client the least-privileged Pebble identity it needs rather than sharing the admin identity. For more information, see [](../how-to/manage-identities.md).
- Apply network isolation so that any exposed ports are reachable only from the hosts and networks that need them, using host firewall rules or network policies as appropriate to your environment.

> FIPS 140-compliant builds of Pebble are available as a separate distribution channel; see the [Cryptographic technology](#cryptographic-technology) section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FIPS 140-compliant builds of Pebble are available as a separate distribution channel. See [Cryptographic technology](#cryptographic-technology).
```

## Security lifecycle

> Pebble is released as the [`pebble` snap](https://snapcraft.io/pebble) and as source releases on GitHub. Pebble follows [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/): the major version changes for incompatible API changes, the minor version for backwards-compatible feature additions, and the patch version for backwards-compatible bug fixes.

Reviewer: I think this would flow better if we abbreviate it a bit:

```suggestion
Pebble is released as the [`pebble` snap](https://snapcraft.io/pebble) and as source releases on GitHub. Pebble follows [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/): major version for incompatible API changes, minor version for backwards-compatible feature additions, and patch version for backwards-compatible bug fixes.
```

> The easiest way to ensure that you get security updates is to install the snap; see [](#install_pebble_snap). The snap's `latest` channel tracks the current release and the `fips` channel tracks the FIPS-compliant builds. Updates are delivered automatically by snap refresh; refer to the [snap documentation](https://snapcraft.io/docs/managing-updates) to schedule or defer refreshes, bearing in mind that delaying a refresh delays security fixes.

Reviewer: "channel tracks" wording is unfortunate 😅 I don't think we actually need to change it. But I offer this for your consideration: "channel provides"

> The versions of Pebble under security maintenance are listed in [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/blob/master/SECURITY.md): security updates are released for major versions that have had releases in the last year and for the versions of Pebble bundled with maintained Juju releases. Long Term Support (LTS) releases receive five years of standard support, with up to ten additional years of [extended support](https://ubuntu.com/security/esm); other releases leave security maintenance once they fall outside the window above.

Reviewer: If I understand correctly, I think we'd be fine to drop the last part. (If there's a nuance I've missed, it would be good to clarify in the text)

```suggestion
The versions of Pebble under security maintenance are listed in [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/blob/master/SECURITY.md): security updates are released for major versions that have had releases in the last year and for the versions of Pebble bundled with maintained Juju releases. Long Term Support (LTS) releases receive five years of standard support, with up to ten additional years of [extended support](https://ubuntu.com/security/esm).
```

> 

Reviewer: Shall we link to https://canonical.com/juju/docs/ops/latest/explanation/versions/?

To verify the installed version of the daemon, run `pebble version`.

(cryptographic-technology)=
## Cryptographic technology

> Pebble uses cryptography in a small number of well-defined places: hashing passwords for the basic identity type, and TLS for the optional HTTPS API. FIPS 140-compliant builds are distributed separately and are described below.

Reviewer: No need for this in the section introduction, I'd say.

```suggestion
Pebble uses cryptography in a small number of well-defined places: hashing passwords for the basic identity type, and TLS for the optional HTTPS API. FIPS 140-compliant builds are distributed separately.
```

### Basic identity type

For the "basic" [identity](/reference/identities) type, Pebble uses Ulrich Drepper's SHA-crypt algorithm with SHA-512 (a 512-bit digest). Specifically, we use the third party Go library [github.com/GehirnInc/crypt](https://github.com/GehirnInc/crypt) for verifying the password hashes sent in a client's `Authorization` HTTP header.

### TLS

Pebble uses the TLS code in Go's standard library when the `--https` argument is passed to `pebble run`, enabling API access over TLS. Pebble negotiates TLS 1.2 or TLS 1.3; older protocol versions are not offered.

> Server-side TLS certificates are managed by Pebble. On first start, a Pebble identity certificate is generated using Ed25519 (256-bit keys). Incoming HTTPS requests will use ephemeral TLS certificates, self-signed with the identity certificate. There is currently no support for integration with an external certificate authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server-side TLS certificates are managed by Pebble. On first start, a Pebble identity certificate is generated using Ed25519 (256-bit keys). Incoming HTTPS requests use ephemeral TLS certificates, self-signed with the identity certificate. There is currently no support for integration with an external certificate authority.
```

Reviewer: Doe we have a realistic plan to support external certificate authorities at some point? If not, I'd drop "currently".

Currently, the Pebble client doesn't support HTTPS (TLS). To connect to a Pebble daemon over HTTPS, you'll need to make [API](/reference/api) calls using `curl --insecure`, for example.

Our intention is that projects that build on Pebble can [override how TLS connections are verified](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/canonical/pebble@v1.23.0/client#Config).

(fips-140)=
### FIPS 140

> This project also distributes [FIPS 140](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIPS_140)-compliant builds of Pebble: the source code is in the `fips` branch and there's the `fips` track for the official [`pebble` snap](https://snapcraft.io/pebble). These builds take the conservative approach of removing access to cryptographic primitives entirely, pending FIPS validation of the Go runtime: basic-auth password hashing is removed (and so is the third-party SHA-crypt library, so only pre-hashed password identities can authenticate), the `--https` flag is unavailable so the daemon will not serve HTTPS, and outbound requests from the CLI, checks, and log targets are restricted to HTTP (HTTPS origins and HTTP-to-HTTPS redirects fail). Refer to [HACKING.md](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/blob/fips/HACKING.md#fips-140-changes) in the `fips` branch for the authoritative list of changes.

Reviewer: "This project [...] distributes" sounds a bit odd to me. The info is also quite dense. How about something like this:

```suggestion
[FIPS 140](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIPS_140)-compliant builds of Pebble are available: the source code is in the [`fips` branch](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/tree/fips) and the [`pebble` snap](https://snapcraft.io/pebble) has a `fips` track. These builds take the conservative approach of removing access to cryptographic primitives entirely, pending FIPS validation of the Go runtime:

* Basic-auth password hashing is removed.
* The third-party SHA-crypt library is removed, so only pre-hashed password identities can authenticate.
* The `--https` flag is unavailable so the daemon will not serve HTTPS.
* Outbound requests from the CLI, checks, and log targets are restricted to HTTP (HTTPS origins and HTTP-to-HTTPS redirects fail).

See [HACKING.md](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/blob/fips/HACKING.md#fips-140-changes) in the `fips` branch for the authoritative list of changes.
```

### Cryptographic packages

> The cryptographic functionality Pebble uses is provided by two sources. The first is the Go standard library, which supplies TLS and certificate handling (`crypto/tls`, `crypto/x509`), key generation and signing for the identity certificate (`crypto/ed25519`, `crypto/rand`), and SHA-512 hashing (`crypto/sha512`). The second is the third-party [github.com/GehirnInc/crypt](https://github.com/GehirnInc/crypt) library, which provides the SHA-crypt password hashing used for the basic identity type. The FIPS builds remove these cryptographic primitives rather than replacing them; see [](#fips-140) for the resulting feature restrictions.

Reviewer: This is quite dense. How about:

```suggestion
The cryptographic functionality Pebble uses is provided by two sources. The first is the Go standard library, which supplies:

* TLS and certificate handling (`crypto/tls`, `crypto/x509`).
* Key generation and signing for the identity certificate (`crypto/ed25519`, `crypto/rand`).
* SHA-512 hashing (`crypto/sha512`).

The second source is the third-party [github.com/GehirnInc/crypt](https://github.com/GehirnInc/crypt) library, which provides the SHA-crypt password hashing used for the basic identity type.

The [FIPS builds](#fips-140) remove these cryptographic primitives rather than replacing them.
```

### Encryption at rest

Pebble does not encrypt state at rest. Confidentiality at rest relies on the `$PEBBLE` directory permissions and on the host's at-rest encryption story. When `$PEBBLE_PERSIST=never` is set, state is held only in memory and the persistence concern does not apply.

## Logging and monitoring

> Pebble emits three streams of logs, each with a distinct purpose. Security events are interleaved on the daemon stream and are described separately below.

Reviewer: I'd drop this intro and adjust the "Security events" section.

```suggestion
```

### Daemon logs

> The Pebble daemon writes its own log messages to its standard error stream as one line per message, where each line carries an ISO-8601 timestamp, a level marker, and a free-text message (for example, `2026-06-24T08:00:00.000Z [pebble] HTTP API server listening on ":4000".`). Two levels are emitted: `Notice` is always on and is intended to be user-visible; `Debug` is gated on the `PEBBLE_DEBUG=1` environment variable. The host's service manager or container runtime collects the stream — there is no separate log file or rotation managed by Pebble itself.

Reviewer: I'd make this less dense:

```suggestion
The Pebble daemon writes its own log messages to its standard error stream as one line per message. Each line carries an ISO-8601 timestamp, a level marker, and a free-text message. For example, `2026-06-24T08:00:00.000Z [pebble] HTTP API server listening on ":4000".`).

Two levels are emitted: `Notice` is always on and is intended to be user-visible; `Debug` is gated on the `PEBBLE_DEBUG=1` environment variable.

The host's service manager or container runtime collects the stream — there is no separate log file or rotation managed by Pebble itself.
```

### Service logs

The standard output and standard error of the services Pebble manages are captured and made available, including as a stream, through the logs API and the [`pebble logs`](#reference_pebble_logs_command) command. Passing `--verbose` (or setting `PEBBLE_VERBOSE=1`) on `pebble run` additionally mirrors service output onto the daemon's own standard output. Service logs can be forwarded to external collectors (for example, Loki) through the log-target configuration in the layer plan.

### Notices

> Pebble also records notices, such as warnings and change updates, which clients can list and wait on through the notices API; for more information, see [](/reference/notices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pebble also records notices, such as warnings and change updates, which clients can list and wait on through the notices API. See [](/reference/notices).
```

### Security events

Interleaved with the free-text daemon log lines, Pebble emits security events on the same stream, following the [OWASP application logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html). Because these events ride on the daemon stream, collecting daemon logs is sufficient to collect them; filter on `"type":"security"` to extract them downstream.

Each event is a single JSON object on its own line:

```json
{
  "type": "security",
  "datetime": "2026-06-24T08:00:00.000Z",
  "level": "WARN",
  "event": "authz_fail:42,/v1/services",
  "description": "UID 42 denied access to /v1/services",
  "appid": "pebble"
}
```

`datetime` is RFC 3339 UTC, `level` is `WARN` or `CRITICAL`, `event` is the OWASP event name optionally suffixed with `:<arg>`, and `appid` defaults to `pebble`.

> The events Pebble currently emits are:

Reviewer: I think this can be made less verbose. Something like:

````suggestion
Security events are interleaved with the free-text daemon log lines. To collect security events, filter on `"type":"security"`.

Each event is a single JSON object on its own line:

```json
{
  "type": "security",
  "datetime": "2026-06-24T08:00:00.000Z",
  "level": "WARN",
  "event": "authz_fail:42,/v1/services",
  "description": "UID 42 denied access to /v1/services",
  "appid": "pebble"
}
```

`datetime` is RFC 3339 UTC, `level` is `WARN` or `CRITICAL`, `event` is the OWASP event name optionally suffixed with `:<arg>`, and `appid` defaults to `pebble`.

Security events follow the [OWASP application logging vocabulary](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Logging_Vocabulary_Cheat_Sheet.html). Pebble emits these events:
````

| Event | Emitted when |
| --- | --- |
| `sys_startup` | The daemon starts. |
| `sys_shutdown` | The daemon shuts down. |
| `sys_monitor_disabled` | Service health monitoring is disabled. |
| `authz_admin` | An admin-level authorisation decision is made. |
| `authz_fail` | An authorisation check fails, including TLS client-certificate verification failures. |
| `user_created` | An identity is added to the identities database. |
| `user_updated` | An identity in the database is modified. |
| `user_deleted` | An identity is removed from the database. |

## Decommissioning

> To remove Pebble, uninstall it using the method it was installed with, such as `sudo snap remove pebble` for the snap. If you no longer need the daemon's state, also remove the `$PEBBLE` directory (`/var/lib/pebble/default` by default). This directory can contain identity secrets and service state, so treat its removal as you would any other deletion of sensitive data. On a FIPS deployment, remove the FIPS-build snap and its `$PEBBLE` directory in the same way.

Reviewer: I'd insert a break to make this more noticeable.

```suggestion
To remove Pebble, uninstall it using the method it was installed with, such as `sudo snap remove pebble` for the snap. If you no longer need the daemon's state, also remove the `$PEBBLE` directory (`/var/lib/pebble/default` by default). This directory can contain identity secrets and service state, so treat its removal as you would any other deletion of sensitive data.

On a FIPS deployment, remove the FIPS-build snap and its `$PEBBLE` directory in the same way.
```

## Reporting vulnerabilities

> Security vulnerabilities in Pebble should be reported privately. References:

Reviewer: Instead of listing all references together, would it be possible to use a structure more like the Ops equivalent? https://canonical.com/juju/docs/ops/latest/explanation/security/#reporting-vulnerabilities. I like that presentation better.
